2025-10-16
Phosphor
Physics, Chemistry
Susam Pal


---

Which of the following statements is true about <em>phosphor</em>?

---

Electrons in it are excited to higher energy states when exposed to
radiation.

---

When exposed to air, it glows faintly due to oxidation.

---

It is a chemical element with atomic number 15.

---

It is used as a filament in incandescent lamps.

---

All of the above.

---

A <em>phosphor</em> is a substance that exhibits the phenomenon of
phosphorescence or fluorescence.  When exposed to certain forms of
radiation (such as ultraviolet light or electron beams), electrons in
its crystal lattice or molecules are excited to higher energy states.
As they return to their ground state, they emit visible light.  If the
substance stops glowing almost immediately once the radiation is
turned off, it is said to be <em>fluorescent</em>.  If it continues to
glow for some time after the radiation is removed, it is said to
be <em>phosphorescent</em>.

Fluorescent materials are used in fluorescent lamps, where phosphor
coatings convert ultraviolet light into visible light, and in
cathode-ray tube (CRT) displays, where electron beams excite the
phosphor coating on the inner surface of the screen to produce images.
Phosphorescent materials are commonly used in glow-in-the-dark watch
dials, safety signs and toys.

The chemical element with atomic number 15 is <em>phosphorus</em> (not
phosphor).  White phosphorus glows faintly when exposed to oxygen, but
this glow is caused by oxidation, not phosphorescence.  This
phenomenon is known as <em>chemiluminescence</em>, the emission of
light as a result of a chemical reaction.  The chemiluminescence of
white phosphorus originally inspired the term phosphorescence,
although the two are unrelated phenomena.

Finally, neither phosphor nor phosphorus is used as a filament in
incandescent lamps.  Filaments in such lamps are typically made of
tungsten.  As mentioned earlier, phosphors may be used as coatings in
fluorescent lamps, but they do not serve as filaments.
