2025-10-25
Royal Fork
Chess, Terminology
Susam Pal

---

Which of the following statements is true about a <em>royal fork</em>
in chess?

---

It is a double attack on the opponent's king and queen by a single piece.

---

It is a double attack on two pieces of the opponent by the queen.

---

It is an opening tactic where the queen and bishop coordinate to
deliver checkmate on f7 by White or on f2 by Black.

---

It is an endgame pattern where two queens coordinate to checkmate the
opponent's king.

---

It is a tactic in which a piece is attacked but cannot move because
doing so would expose its king to check.

---

When two attacks are made with one move, it is called a <em>double
attack</em>.  If both attacks are made by the same piece, it is called
a <em>fork</em>.  In other words, a fork occurs when one piece attacks
two or more of the opponent's pieces at the same time.

A <em>royal fork</em> is a special type of fork in which a single
piece attacks the opponent's king and queen at the same time.  Since
the opponent must respond to the check against the king, the queen is
usually captured on the following move, making this the highest
material-gaining fork possible.

A fork involving the queen attacking two of the opponent's pieces is
simply called a <em>queen fork</em>, not a royal fork.

The opening tactic where the queen and bishop coordinate to deliver
checkmate on f7 by White or on f2 by Black is called the Scholar's
Mate.  Despite being a quick and threatening attack, it is easy to
defend against by developing minor pieces and defending the vulnerable
f7 or f2 square early.  For this reason, it is rarely seen in serious
play.

Checkmating with two queens is an elementary endgame pattern that
relies on restricting the opposing king's mobility and coordinating
both queens to force checkmate.  This pattern is unrelated to fork.

If a defending piece cannot move because doing so would expose a more
valuable piece behind it to attack, the situation is called a
<em>pin</em>.  If the more valuable piece is the king, the pin is
called an <em>absolute pin</em>.
